>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Minority Report,
Manchurian Candidate,
even Eternal Sunshine
of the Spotless Mind.
All of these Hollywood
films depict a future as one
in which our minds can be
altered without our permission.
But what if the future
also holds the possibility
to alter our own consciousness,
collectively and personally,
with technology as well?
Adam Curry is one of the bright
young ones out there today
who is bringing forth really
astounding information
in technology.
He's here with us to
tell us a little bit
about what our future may hold.
So Adam, it's great
to have you here.
It's so nice to
have a little bit
younger face than
I usually have,
and that's just because
you're a genius.
I mean, what can you say?
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: Who knows,
maybe had conscious media
been around in the time
of some of my other guests
I would have been
interviewing them at your age.
But it's a pleasure.
>>ADAM CURRY: It's a
pleasure for me, too.
Thanks for having me.
>>REGINA: I wanted to find
out, first of all-- there's
another Adam Curry out there.
Just clear this
up so people don't
go online and say, Adam
Curry, and they're already
doing a search.
>>CURRY: Right.
It's before my time, but I
think in the '80s the first MTV
VJ was a guy named Adam Curry.
And so the more famous
Adam Curry, of course,
is the MTV VJ.
>>REGINA: Let's
talk about you now,
the Adam curry that's here.
You were born in Boulder, right?
>>CURRY: Born in Colorado.
>>REGINA: Yeah, in Colorado.
And at a very early
age you started
having some epiphanies
having to do with gravity,
which probably started setting
you apart from your playmates,
OK?
Maybe.
Unless you were all doing
Dungeons and Dragons together.
But let's talk about your
epiphany regarding gravity,
just to kind of let
people start knowing
a little bit about who you are.
And I'm going to make you talk
about your accomplishments,
if you don't mind, in
some depth because we
want to see what kind of
mind we're looking at here.
>>CURRY: I'll oblige.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>CURRY: So I grew up tinkering.
I was always taking things apart
and putting them back together,
and I loved building things.
And a friend of mine,
an older friend kind of
got interested in science.
And he showed me a
badly-xeroxed research report
by a scientist named
Gregory Hodowanec who worked
for RCA back in the '70s.
And he found that small
electronic circuits
called capacitors behave in
strange ways that can't really
be explained.
And I thought, hm,
that's interesting.
I was building
electronics at that time,
so I thought I'd take them
out and start testing it.
I got the idea that whatever's
happening in this capacitor
might be related to what's
happening on the planet.
You have these giant mass shifts
happening under the earth,
and maybe there's
some connection.
So I built a device that
converted these capacitors
into signals and compared
it to seismic data, so
earthquake data.
And I was very lucky, in the
sense that it correlated.
And what that
meant was that this
is a potentially basic
new technology that
could help scientists
forecast earthquakes.
So it did really well.
It won lots of awards, and I
got to travel around and talk
about--
>>REGINA: Were you
17 at this time?
>>CURRY: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
And lobby for building a global
network of these devices.
>>REGINA: And they
communicate with each other?
The devices communicate
with one another,
or did they operate singularly?
>>CURRY: They
operated singularity.
I unfortunately was not able
to build a global network,
but I did kind of
punt it to some people
at the USGS who-- I haven't been
in touch with them for awhile,
but they were looking
into it as well.
>>REGINA: You know,
it's interesting
because off camera I
said, you know, when
I look at your life-- your
life, your early life reminds me
in a lot of ways of
Patrick Flanagan,
who I just-- I
just adore Patrick.
And one of the things
he became known
for at 14 years old-- and
this was a long time ago,
at the science fair
in high school--
was that he had built a nuclear
detonation detection device.
And he built it for about $15.
And meanwhile
there was a project
going on in Alaska-- I don't
even remember-- 20 million.
I don't know.
They spent a lot of money
trying to do the same thing.
So the men in the coats just
came and stole his technology
and there you go.
That's how his life went.
But the two of you have
kind of a similar mind
and a type of-- if
I may say-- there is
seems kind of an
intellectual purity,
but there's also heart involved
in a lot of what you do.
It's not just
intellectual curiosity,
but you bring an
integrated being behind it.
>>CURRY: Well kids have
the enviable position
of being able to do
science to the extent
that they care about it,
and that excites them.
And so maybe that's why you
have young people exploring
these things that
other people are not.
Maybe they're
interested in, but they
can't do because they
have to put career first.
>>REGINA: Yes, they do.
And then it gets corrupted.
Then you have to
worry about tenure.
Then you have to worry
about feeding your kids
and losing that job
at the University.
It all starts coming in.
>>CURRY: Well, maybe with
some of these discoveries
that will change, and we'll
have a new sort of gold rush
when it comes to the more
exotic things to research.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Now let's talk
about the year 2002.
It sounds like that was a
really big year for you.
Again, you were in the
spotlight, similar to Patrick,
with all these accolades.
Talk about what happened,
some of the accolades
that were awarded to you,
because they were substantial.
>>CURRY: Well, related to the
earthquake device-- let's see,
MIT gave me the Ceres
Connection prize,
which is where they name an
asteroid in our solar system
after you.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I read that.
At 17 you have an
asteroid named after you.
>>CURRY: Yeah, unfortunately
you don't get any, like,
satisfying statuette
or anything,
you just kind of
know that there's
an asteroid floating
around up there in space,
which is kind of cool.
And then there were some other
scientific accommodations
from the US Navy and so forth.
But more significantly
perhaps, at that time
I give a talk at a conference at
the University of Virginia that
was concerning scientific
study of anomalies in general.
And I had gone there
because the capacitor
stuff that I was looking
at was an anomaly itself.
And having looked at
anomalies, at things
that can't be explained,
I was able to find
something that really benefited
the science of seismicity.
so when you look at things that
can't be explained sometimes
you can find new
areas where there's
a lot of potential to be had.
So I went to this
conference, and it
was a three-day
conference and there
were many other
scientists there,
professional scientists,
research scientists
and professors as
well who, in each
of their different disciplines,
had encountered anomalies,
things that were not explained
by the prevailing theories
or sometimes dogma,
but that nonetheless
could revolutionize what
is known in their field.
And sometimes they were the
ones who had discovered it,
but sometimes the anomalies
had been sort of "known"
and either overlooked or
intentionally ignored.
But I think to the
detriment of those fields--
and I was blown away
because I realized
that this is a systematic
problem in science.
You know, science it does a
very good job when it concerns
itself with things
that are OK to study,
but there are some
things that don't
fit within our body of
knowledge, and they're ignored.
But that's where
you can find, like,
the really big discoveries.
That's where you need to look
if you want to take things
to the next level.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So you were seeing,
as a collective,
it was not just dogging
what you were doing,
it was dogging everyone.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And
oftentimes at that level
it's chosen to be
swept under the rug
because now you have to stretch
beyond scientific materialism.
>>CURRY: Well, that's
a big-- there's
a lot to say about that.
>>REGINA: Say it.
Go ahead.
>>CURRY: OK.
>>REGINA: We can always have
you back if we don't get
through everything on my list.
I want to hear what
you have to say.
>>CURRY: Right.
Well, you mentioned materialism.
Scientists don't like
to think that they
have metaphysical
assumptions, but they do.
And the metaphysical assumption
that scientists, in general,
these days have is what
we call materialism.
Materialism is the idea that
the only thing that exists
is physical stuff,
and everything
that exists in
every phenomena can
be explained-- from small
particles up to our bodies
and our minds up to
the cosmos-- they
can all be explained
by the known properties
of the physical world.
And it's an interesting story
about how we got here in.
In the ancient world, sort of
the physical world and the mind
and spirituality were
thought to be all integrated.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CURRY: OK.
And that metaphysic
back then was
what we might today
call the supernatural,
or sort of the magical realms.
But that was the metaphysic that
underlied the belief systems
back then.
And that persisted up to
about the 17th century,
when the people who were
trying to do science,
scientists at that time,
were starting to threaten
the power of the church.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CURRY: And that didn't
bode well for them,
as you can imagine.
And so what happens
is, a philosopher
named Renee Descartes
came our with this idea
that you could separate
the natural world
and the spiritual
world, which to his mind
included the mind
or consciousness.
And then a short while after
him came this Englishman
with this Adam Curry,
MTV-VJ-looking hair
called Isaac Newton
who codified some
of the first
scientific principles
in math, Newtonian mechanics.
And that was what we call
the classical period.
And the metaphysical assumption
of the classical period
was dualism, it
was called dualism.
And that persisted up
until about the end
of the 19th century when
Einstein, with relativity,
suggested that this
isn't really true.
But it really ended the
end of the last century
with quantum mechanics.
And with quantum mechanics
the metaphysical assumptions
of dualism were replaced
with our current metaphysical
assumption, which
is materialism.
Now, I would suggest that,
going all the way back
to what you'd said before,
one of the problems
that we see when a certain group
of scientists look at anomalies
and they're
summarily ignored, is
that we're encountering
the precipice
of the end of the metaphysical
assumption of materialism.
And we don't yet have the
new metaphysical assumption
to replace it.
I don't know what
it would be called,
but I can tell you
that it's going
to have a few characteristics.
One is that it's
going to do away
with this strict
notion of materialism,
that the only thing that
exists are physical things,
and the only way they can
behave is through the laws
that we somehow
know 100 percent of.
That's over.
And the second thing
that it's going to do
is it's going to
integrate consciousness.
It's going to integrate the
last big mystery of-- well,
the last big
mystery that we know
of now, which is the nature
of our minds and what mind is.
So we're in this liminal period
right now between materialism
and whatever comes after it.
>>REGINA: It's interesting
because, as you noticed,
for many years I've been reading
about various technologies
and various studies
and all of this.
And again, this anomaly
keeps popping up, right?
And I just keep thinking,
it's consciousness, stupid.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: But why is there
such a great-- I mean,
we already know the answer.
I mean, it's a
rhetorical question.
Why is there such great
fear of tippy-toeing
beyond the boundaries of what
someone's mentor or professor
once passed down to one?
>>CURRY: Some people have
said that science advances one
death at a time.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
That's true.
>>CURRY: But it's a
complicated answer.
You know, it's
fascinating that we
seem to know more about things
that lie very far beyond us--
the behavior of black
holes and galaxies
and so forth-- than we know
about the thing that is most
close to us, which is
our subjective awareness
and consciousness.
I can break down that
question in a number of ways,
but I'll pick three.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>CURRY: Why hasn't
consciousness
been an obvious anomaly
that we've looked at before?
Well, one is that,
as I mentioned,
the metaphysical assumptions
belying it-- materialism--
would tell us that we don't
even need to look there,
because our brains are
composed of particles
and therefore our minds are
nothing more than an illusion
produced by the brain.
So we really need
concern ourselves
with physics and
chemistry and biology,
but that mind stuff,
that consciousness stuff,
is just a ghost.
It's just an illusion,
not important.
Well, there's a tiny
revolution that's
been happening in philosophy,
and that's philosophy of mind.
And to provide the
world's shortest summary,
it goes something like this.
If consciousness is an
illusion, the question
becomes, an illusion to whom?
So you see, you
need consciousness
to be able to experience
anything including illusions.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Exactly.
>>CURRY: And that seems
very obvious, right?
But it's actually--
it hasn't really
dawned so much-- it hasn't
really been taken seriously
in science yet.
As we've done away
with philosophy
and focused only on
the hard sciences,
the obvious-- which would be
a teaching from philosophy--
is only starting
to gain traction.
And perhaps people
are starting to see
that, if you say consciousness
is an illusion you're actually
presupposing the existence
of the very thing
you say doesn't exist.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>CURRY: So it's taken
us awhile to acknowledge
that philosophy has
something to teach us
about the hard sciences.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And that's one of the things
that's just devastating
about the current paradigm is
that a person, say, graduates
with a degree in philosophy,
maybe it's her Ph.D.
In philosophy,
which is considered
by Wall Street or
the outside world
as some kind of toilet paper.
You might as well toss it and
then get a job as a waiter.
There's no place.
There's been no place
made in modern times
for philosophical thought, which
is at the root of everything
we're talking about here.
So what you just
said is encouraging
because you see that there is a
place for philosophy beginning
to emerge again, particularly
as applies to science.
>>CURRY: There's a huge
place for philosophy,
especially as it applies
to science, especially
as it applies to
science right now.
I talked about how we're
in this liminal period
between shuffling off the
old metaphysical assumptions
and taking on something new.
Well, whenever that happens in
history, what you need to do
is you need to get your
first principles correct.
So philosophy-- one of the
tool kits from philosophy
is that you can reason
from first principles,
and you can reason from effect.
So reasoning from
a first principle
would be getting your
fundamental assumptions
true and correct.
And if you can
accomplish that, then you
can make little logical
leaps from those fundamental
assumptions, and
your thinking is
going to be true and correct
from that point forward.
What happens a lot when
people are incorrect
is that they reason from effect.
So they'll look at effects
of something and they'll say,
well, this is the
fundamental, and they'll
make these category errors.
>>REGINA: It's more empirical
>>CURRY: Exactly.
And what we think
are first principles
seems to evolve over time.
In this case, our
first principle
could be synonymous
with whatever
new metaphysical assumption
is coming down our way.
And so it's very imperative
that philosophical thinking
enter our calculations--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>CURRY: If you
will, at this point,
in order to keep us honest.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
I'm so glad to
hear you say that.
OK.
We're going to jump
back again to the time
when you met-- I was asking how
to pronounce his name-- Robert
Jahn and Brenda Dunne.
And let's talk about how your
life shifted at that point.
>>CURRY: Right.
So actually it was at that
same conference, about which
I was speaking earlier,
that a handful of scientists
approached me and
one was Bob Jahn who
was the dean emeritus of
the engineering school
at Princeton, very
famous rocket scientist.
The man who had created
the whole field, generally,
of plasma physics.
And there's a whole generation
of spacecraft flying around
in space that are essentially
his brain children.
And his ever-present lab
manager, Brenda Dunne.
And these two were from
the PEAR lab at Princeton.
And PEAR is an
acronym that stands
for Princeton Engineering
Anomalies Research lab.
It's a mouthful.
But basically what it is-- it
was a rigorous parapsychology
laboratory that existed
at Princeton University
from the '70s up
until the mid 2000s.
It differed from the sort
of classical parapsychology
labs of Duke and so
forth in certain ways.
One, of which is that it took
a very rigorous engineering
perspective to the question
of, what is consciousness
and what can it do?
Is it an illusion
encapsulated in the brain,
or is it something more?
If it's something more, then
presumably we can look to see
if consciousness can interact
with the physical world in ways
that cannot be explained
by materialist assumptions.
So the PEAR lab was famous for
setting up these experiments
to test that.
Before we get into
that-- you know,
they told me these stories
when I met Bob and Brenda
and either they took
some sympathy on me
or it was a cunning
ruse to recruit
fresh blood as unpaid interns.
>>REGINA: There's always that.
Then you guys go for it.
We all do.
>>CURRY: Exactly But
we became fast friends
and I ended up eventually
spending my summers
at the PEAR lab at Princeton
participating in various ways
with the laboratory.
In some cases research,
but also just various--
>>REGINA: Let's talk about some
of the kind of experimentation
that was going on?
>>CURRY: Yeah.
That's fascinating stuff.
So the PEAR lab was well known
for experiments involving
random number generators.
So a random number generator
is just what it sounds like.
It measures some type of
physical thing in the world--
so usually it's a
quantum phenomena,
like electron tunneling
or quantum tunneling--
and it converts
those measurements
into random numbers, 1s and 0s.
Because of the way that
quantum mechanics works,
the numbers can't be predicted
based on the numbers that
came after it, so
you end up with this,
like, fundamentally-- or
intrinsically random bit
stream.
100110011.
And so what happens
that if you look
at the bit stream of this
random number generator
you get even numbers
of 1s and 0s.
Makes sense.
Everything is right
with the world.
Until you get
somebody to attempt
to affect the machine or the
output of the machine using
only their intention, only their
consciousness, if you will.
And it works.
It produces more 1s or more 0s
depending on their intention.
And it does so in a way that's
statistically significant.
So it's a very simple
experiment that's just--
>>REGINA: But profound.
>>CURRY: But profound.
But very profound.
It's profound because it
flies in the face of all
the materialist
assumptions at that point,
and suggests that there is--
we don't know how exactly,
but there's a very
deep relationship
between consciousness, between
our subjective reality,
and the behavior of the
physical world outside of us.
At least at those quantum, or
at least those uncertain levels.
>>REGINA: What I find
interesting about that--
many years ago, probably
about the time you were born,
I was interviewing Russell
Targ the first time.
He'd just come back
in the Soviet Union
where they were doing
experiments in remote viewing,
and they were dealing
with random generators,
but the generators were
actually using imagery, just
an assortment of random imagery.
And the question
became-- and they
were, as a result of some
of the work-- actually,
I think it was at Duke rather
than Princeton now that I
think of it.
What they were finding
is that the viewer
was more detailed in
their accuracy viewing
into the future.
Now, they didn't know
they were doing that.
They were reporting
what they saw
and it was revealed later
that the image wasn't
chosen until four hours
after the image was selected.
So that begs the
question, chicken or egg?
What's going on there?
Did her consciousness choose the
random generation of that image
then, like what you're
saying, the programming,
the sequences of 1s and 0s?
>>CURRY: Yeah.
That's a really good question.
I hadn't heard that before.
And the short answer
is, I have no idea.
But it illustrates
this kind of-- when
you're doing these
types of research,
there's experimenter
effects that you
don't get in classical
science, apparently,
which confounds
the ability to do
this stuff in a
strictly-controlled, replicable
manner.
So was she viewing the
future more accurately
or was some aspect of her
subconscious influencing
the random number generator
to pick the thing that she
happened to describe?
>>REGINA: Who knows?
>>CURRY: I don't know.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: I mean, it's certainly
possible her mind influenced
it, because her mind was
already beyond time and space
anyway at that point, right?
If you're remote viewing
you have the ability
to move beyond time and space.
>>CURRY: Not only that, but
it could be that she described
a scenario and then
retroactively she caused the--
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm saying.
>>CURRY: She caused the
random number generator.
So we-- I didn't, but
the PEAR lab actually did
do some experiments to test
this idea of conscious influence
being extant in--
outside of time,
so existing before and after.
And in the classical experiment
a person would be seated
in front of the random number
generator and their intention
would be to make it produce more
1's, and it would produce more
1's.
So then they started to move
the person away a little bit.
And it got really far, to
where the person, they called
the operator, was, you
know, hundreds of miles away
and intending to
affect the machine,
and it behaved in this
statistically anomalous way.
>>REGINA: It was the same
with the Russian experiment.
>>CURRY: Exactly.
And that evolved into,
OK, well, distance
doesn't seem to matter.
So what about time?
And it's actually very
easy to test this.
You use the random
number generator
to record data ahead of time.
You don't look at
it, so it's still
in this state of uncertainty.
And then sometime
in the future you
ask somebody to affect
the output of the data,
the output of the RNG.
>>REGINA: Which has already
occurred, theoretically.
>>CURRY: Which has already
occurred in the past.
You know, produce
more 1s and more 0s.
And lo and behold,
like, often it works.
And the effect size
is quite large.
Same, too, in the future
you can instruct somebody
to attempt to affect the
machine in the future
at some pre-defined point.
They stop, then a couple of
weeks or months in the future
you run the machine
and behold, you
get the same types of effects.
Very strange.
>>REGINA: It is very strange.
And I find it fascinating
because we can-- certainly
our audience watching right
now can accept that you can
effect events of the future.
I mean, through basic processes
of entropy and so forth.
>>CURRY: Sure.
>>REGINA: But it's really a
hard stretch for most people
to perceive that we might be
able to affect what's already
occurred, the past.
>>CURRY: I agree.
>>REGINA: That makes our
mind bend a little bit more.
Yeah, but I remember it.
It already happened, where the
future is uncertain by nature.
>>CURRY: Exactly.
Well, in this case
time doesn't seem
to matter as much because
the past is-- well,
we're talking about
the past in things
that no one's observed yet.
So it's still a set of data
that's in, if you will,
a state of uncertainty.
So we think of the
past as something
that has been observed
and is proven to be stayed
and the way it is.
But you can create situations
where there's uncertainty
that exist in the past.
You might think of the
future as a probability
function of the present.
And it could be that
the past is somehow
a probability function
of the present too,
in a very limited sense.
And in that case,
since consciousness
seems to have this
ability to kind
of nudge probabilities
this way and that, then
maybe it's not too
much of a stretch
to think that it could
nudge the probabilities
of a physical
system in the future
just as it can nudge
the probabilities
of a physical system that
has already done its thing.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And just that one sentence, that
one explanation could launch
people down a worm hole that
takes lifetimes to really,
fully understand the
implications of, right?
>>CURRY: Probably, yeah.
>>REGINA: I mean, when
you think about it
from a metaphysical context, if
we can affect our past, which
then affects our
present-- say, if we're
using our own timeline-- if we
affect our own-- if we go back
and rearrange the past through
consciousness, that creates
a different outcome for
now, which of course creates
a different outcome
for the future.
And how many people wish
they could go back and just
undo that one thing, or make
that one decision differently?
From what we're saying
here in these experiments,
that's exactly what
we, theoretically,
should be able to do.
>>CURRY: At least on
a very small, like,
bit level, that
could be the case.
It's fun to think
about though, isn't it?
Like, there's a lot of
science fiction stores
where time travelers get
stuck in these time loops
and have to, like, go back
and do things that affect--
>>REGINA: Like
Back to the Future.
>>CURRY: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: Dad, don't.
Don't make that mistake, Dad.
Which captivated, you
know, millions and millions
of people with the possibility,
the theoretical possibility.
So in addition to your
background as a scientist
and a creator, inventory,
all of these things,
you're also a poet.
And it's interesting
because poets are often
inspired by things
beyond time and space,
and they have a unique way
of bringing this through.
Let's talk about those
two aspects of your being,
because one would
say, well, one's
right brain, one's left brain.
Not at all.
It appears to me that
you're using equal faculties
in both of these situations.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
I studied creative
writing in school,
and poetry has always
been a love of mine.
Yeah.
People are not one-dimensional,
or they don't have to be.
And so-- I'm self-taught in so
many things, in engineering,
and science, and poetry,
which means I'm not
particularly good at anything.
>>REGINA: Oh, I doubt that.
>>CURRY: But I have a sort
of broad panoply of interests
and skills.
And, you know, when
I was in school
I was studying physics as
well as creative writing,
and I would have
assignments for both,
and I found that if I kind
of got stuck on one thing
I'd work on something else,
and I could come back to it.
And it was a challenge,
but at every level
I was kind of, like,
improving my own abilities.
And maybe you can
think of the fact
that if we acknowledged
that we are gifted
through this subjective
sort of consciousness,
the fact that we do have
an attendant subjective
experience, then
things like poetry
are kind of like dancing in it.
It's a way to savor the
qualia of just being.
And a really good poem allows
readers to do just that.
>>REGINA: Which is interesting
because poets have always kind
of threatened politicians
throughout history.
[LAUGHTER]
>>CURRY: Yeah.
That's a really good point.
>>REGINA: And that's
something that you also
discusses, is this
notion of societies
being essentially framed
around accepted authority.
And most of the time
people such as yourself
and the poets of the world
and the radical scientists
of the world don't
fall within that,
and they're often
black-balled, ridiculed,
and discredited as a result.
Let's talk about the
notion of society's rule
by accepted authority, and
extended into the world
that you're dealing
with right now.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
I mean this is an old problem.
Human beings themselves are
kind of like-- they have, like,
one foot in the future
and one foot in the past.
Right?
We're sort of, like, half alien
and half, like, chimpanzee,
in a way.
And I mean that
only in the sense
that we are these
liminal creatures,
and that we're partially evolve
but partially caveman-like.
And you know, you see,
we live in a modern world
with great technology
and things,
but you can see, perhaps,
areas where we still
have yet to develop.
One of these is, we are
very quick to allow rulers
in our lives and to give
over our personal authority.
And I understand
why to some extent,
it's facile to have somebody in
charge of things in our life,
but that can get out of hand.
You know, it's a
very common fallacy
that everyone knows about, which
is the appeal to authority.
And everyone uses
it, even people
in consciousness research.
But it's dangerous
because, if you
don't look at things
yourself and if you
don't question things
that "everybody knows,"
then you can end up operating
from an incorrect set
of first principles.
You can reason from effects
that someone else gives you
and you can end up in a really
bad situations pretty quick.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And we're being
perpetually manipulated,
whether it's for
corporate gain or whatnot,
the populace of this
planet is constantly
being manipulated to accept
a certain set of parameters
as their boundaries of their
life and their thinking
and so forth.
And for purposes of
ruling over people,
I can see that there
would be a benefit
to whoever wants
to, essentially,
control the masses.
But for the individual,
imagine what
happens when you start stepping
beyond these space-time
boundaries, when
you start stepping
into pure consciousness,
and then you
start stepping into
consciousness that has
the ability to alter matter.
Which, we're doing it all the
time anyway in subtle ways,
even within our own
human body and such.
So I know that's kind of a
broad, sweeping statement,
but I want to start
backing into your app,
into the Consciousness
app from there.
You're presenting something
that is paradigm-shifting,
as I'm understanding it
and gives some power back
to the people.
I also want to ask you
about what the dark side
implications could
possibly be, because we
want to know that, too.
>>CURRY: Right.
So the question is, what do
we do with this research?
We have something like 1,000
rigorous peer reviewed studies
that show that clairvoyance,
telepathy, psychokinesis,
whatever, like,
this stuff is real.
On the order of-- a collective
probability on the order of 1.3
times 10 to the 104th, right?
Which, a scientist
estimated the number
of atoms in the known
universe as something like 10
to the 83rd.
So this is even
greater than that.
So, OK.
Like, consciousness can do
things and we can't explain it.
So what you're suggesting
there in your first point
is, so what?
Like, what do we do about it?
>>REGINA: Or being manipulated
away from doing anything,
and now is kind of
a-- I don't know.
I see it as a
dividing time where
we can choose to start
working with these discoveries
and principles, or--
it's not very good
trajectory if we choose
not to embrace this.
>>CURRY: Yes.
>>REGINA: So let's go
on your trajectory.
>>CURRY: OK.
Yeah.
I do think that it's
important that we embrace it.
First, because it's the truth,
but second because if we
internalize, as perhaps we have
the ideas of materialism, which
is to say, as Richard
Dawkins once put it,
that we are lumbering
robots blindly programmed
by our genes, then what is
the purpose of treating one
another fairly, and what is--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Right.
Not my favorite author,
scientist, whatever.
>>CURRY: And I don't
think a lot of people
really believe that anyway.
But it illustrates a point.
Perhaps we can bring back
renewed respect for one another
by sort of internalizing the
teachings of consciousness
research, if you will.
A second reason that requires
people to sort of come
out and promote consciousness
research in the sciences
and elsewhere is,
it's very clear
that society develops
in accord with what
they think is possible.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>CURRY: So no social
leader, no scientist,
no inventor is going to
try anything new if they
think there's not a
chance it could work.
But if we understand that what
these experiments are telling
us, for example, that there
might be something more to us
then suddenly there is a chance
that whatever new thing they
invent, whatever new
system they build,
whatever new organization
they try to build
can succeed along these levels,
then they're going to try it.
And honestly, it's
going to work.
So I suppose that, in a small
way, what I'm working on
with the Consciousness app, or
the consciousness technology,
is my own expression of that.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's dive in
and find out what
that is, why you've done it,
what it is, how it works,
what its potentials are.
>>CURRY: Well, for
the past few years
I've been kind of combining
my inventor and tech
side with the side of me
that's interested in conscience
research to create,
I guess, what I'm
calling consciousness
technology.
And in a nutshell, if we
know from the experiments
that our minds can interface
with the physical world
in these new ways,
then presumably you
can create brand new
kinds of technologies
that utilizes this
interface to do new things.
In other words, mind-influenced
technology, of technology
that responds to consciousness,
but not by putting electrodes
on the scalp and
measuring brain waves,
but by something
completely different.
>>REGINA: OK.
First, let's back up
for just a second.
Where did you get this idea?
I mean, what was your epiphany?
>>CURRY: I had the idea
very close to when I first
heard about this research,
which was-- you know,
I've been doing this
stuff for half my life.
And the idea had existed
well before even I was born.
You can read some of the
texts of, like, Dean Radin,
for example.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I was just going
to bring him up.
>>CURRY: And so
people who become
convinced that this
research is real,
the next question is, what
are the applications that
can be built from it?
Well, I'm lucky,
I suppose, in that
I live in San Francisco in the
middle of the tech Renaissance,
and we're all walking around
with these supercomputers
in our pockets
called smart phones.
And so a few years ago
I wrote a research grant
from a Portuguese
Research Foundation
called the BL Foundation,
which gave me some money
to prototype a true random
number generator technology
on the iPhone, on smartphone.
So the idea there
was that if we could
create a good random
number generator
source then a person's
intention can actually affect--
>>REGINA: So you could do
your own PEARs experiments.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
You could do your own,
like, PEAR experiments.
Or you could do any other type
of mind-matter interaction
thing that you
might conceive of.
And we did.
It was successful.
At that time there was a
research and development
company called Psyleron that
had come out of the PEAR lab.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Tell us about Psyleron.
That's a part of your story.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
So the PEAR lab closed in 2007,
and myself and some friends
built this company called
Psyleron out of the PEAR lab.
And we originally just wanted to
create random number generator
tools, like, simple USB
random number generator stuff
that people could
purchase for a low price
and continue the research
that PEAR was doing.
And the interest and the
demand for these products
was much higher than we thought.
So we ended up creating a
whole new class of products.
>>REGINA: Who was the demand by?
>>CURRY: Generally it's
by the interested public.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>CURRY: So there are
some universities.
I don't know.
Probably a dozen or so around
the world who are doing this
type of consciousness
research, but there's--
>>REGINA: Mostly
individual basis though?
Most of the interest
was individuals?
>>CURRY: Yes.
Just Thousands of
people who want
to have a hands-on experience
of what we're talking about.
So we built the hardware
for that, and provided that.
Through Psyleron
is where we also
developed the app technology.
So we got this app
built, and it works
by using the accelerometer
inside the phone.
This is a very sensitive
physical thing,
and if you take the least
significant bit of this
and do some
processing to it, you
can end up with a really
good random bit stream.
And we distributed
this to our friends
and they did a little
experiment where
they would collect a baseline
data, where they weren't
trying to influence the random
number generator on the phone.
It was flat.
And then we asked them to
pre-state whether or not
they wanted to produce
more 1s of more 0s
by tapping up or down,
and they did, and then
they would attempt to nudge
the thing with their thoughts.
And at the end of these
series of experiments
their data was sent back to a
central server where we put it
all together and analyzed it.
And it worked.
We saw the same type of
consciousness-correlated
signatures that we
saw in the PEAR lab.
>>REGINA: So is the
accelerometer-- what part of it
was doing the
sensing of the field?
I mean, I assume it was not
coming through the bio-field.
It's coming through the field.
OK.
So I mean-- Yeah.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, that's the question
that most people want to know,
is what is the mechanism by
which our minds could possibly
have any influence over,
like, random randomness?
And fortunately, no
one knows, so I'll
spare you a lengthy answer.
>>REGINA: No one knows?
But you invented it.
You have to know.
It didn't just randomly happen.
>>CURRY: It's really
funny to work in a field
where you can build stuff and
you don't know how it works.
But, that's true, honestly.
Of course everybody
has their theory
about what consciousness
is and how it
can interface with the world.
And that's what's so fun
about working this field,
is that everyone
has their own theory
and they really
want to tell you.
I'm a bit theory-agnostic.
I don't know how our
minds are capable,
for example, of influencing
random number generators.
>>REGINA: You know, it
makes sense, as I'm just
thinking about it, or kind
of playing with it in my head
anyway, that you're talking
about bits of data, whatever
those bits of data
look like, whether it's
just 1s and 0s,
imagery and so forth.
And if the mind is
out in the field,
why would not be
intercepting, influencing,
and working with bits of data?
That's what it's doing all the
time anyway organically, right?
>>CURRY: Right.
I would say that
we tend to think
about forces as these
things that start at a point
and like spread out.
So an electromagnetic
forces is, like--
you've got this electromagnet in
it, sends out electromagnetic--
>>REGINA: And the brain is
electromagnetic by nature.
>>CURRY: Right.
And so there's a
tendency to maybe think
of the consciousness
effect as, like,
something that's coming out
of our heads or whatever,
but that's clearly not true.
It's not true because time
and space don't seem to--
>>REGINA: It's coming
from a larger field, yeah.
>>CURRY: It's more
proper, I think,
to conceive of this force
as an informational field,
rather than a physical
field like that.
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>CURRY: Now what
does that mean?
I don't know.
But just to kind
of get our, like,
the way that we visualize
these things correctly,
it's more likely
characterized as some type
of informational force that's
making this stuff happen.
>>REGINA: You know,
It's interesting because
about a year, a
year and half ago I
interviewed a man who is in
a totally esoteric field.
He was the inventor of the
online site astrology.com,
taro.com, and so forth.
Well, he sold it, turned
that over to other people,
and decided to put his time
and money into creating an app.
And you think, OK, parlor
game, but it's rather uncanny,
actually, in that he did an
I Ching oracle type of app.
And so once you tap into the
program, you pose a question.
And it said either write it
but really hold it, pose it,
think about it.
And then again, tapping,
tapping the screen
you start bringing up the six
I Ching lines, broken or solid.
What happened the very first
day blew all of our minds,
because it happened
to someone in here,
and it told the exact thing that
happened to her the next day.
And it was-- and I have
found-- every now and then
I'll play with it and
it's like, god, how can it
get that, no less do
the exact same one twice
when a clear message is
trying to get through to you
on an app?
The field, working
with technology.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
That's a good example.
What you might also be
describing is synchronicity.
>>REGINA: Yes.
We can talk about that.
>>CURRY: So synchronicity
can be a lot of things.
It can be getting a message
from an I Ching app,
it can be opening
a fortune cookie
and getting a very
prudent message.
>>REGINA: Yes, it can,
where you attracted
that particular message.
>>CURRY: Yeah, yeah.
Or it could be
thinking about somebody
with whom you haven't
spoken in a while
and they call you on the phone.
Stories abound.
>>REGINA: But that's
still a resonance field.
I mean, synchronicity, seems to
me, has to deal with resonance.
>>CURRY: It could be.
It could be.
I think a lot of people
experience these things
by words that we use,
like, called resonance.
There's a feeling that
perhaps goes along with this.
And we use these terms like
resonance, and the field,
and so forth to describe it.
Whether or not that's
actually the mechanism
is still unknown to people.
But that's OK.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Functionally speaking,
that's what it feels like.
>>CURRY: Exactly.
You know, synchronicity
is an interesting one
in the context of what
we've been discussing,
especially when it comes to
the idea of consciousness
technology.
And I'll give you some
interesting stories.
>>REGINA: Do.
>>CURRY: When we
were at Psyleron
we set up this system that had a
random number generator running
for each of us that worked
at the company, all the time.
And whenever the random number
generator produced a spike
in its data it would send an
alert to our mobile phone.
So we'd get a text message
that says, you know, spike.
And what was really funny
is that we'd be going around
throughout our day and we'd
start to talk about this system
we'd set up, and we get
this message, spike.
It's like, oh, that's curious.
>>REGINA: When you
were connecting.
>>CURRY: Yeah, when we
were talking about it.
And sometimes we'd be having a
really good dinner conversation
with our friends and we were
like, there was that resonance,
as you said, right?
That kind of feeling,
whatever it is, and we'd
get this message, spike.
Oh, that's really interesting.
So we thought, how
can we extend this?
So instead of this
"spike" message,
we put in a series
of other messages.
I think a bunch of them I
got from fortune cookies,
like, watch out, or
call someone you love,
or I know you're thinking
about me, is another.
And what happened is that
we would get these messages
at times that were synchronistic
to what we were doing
or thinking at that moment.
Especially the one, I know
you're thinking about me,
because when we'd
talk about SyncTXT
we'd start getting
this-- we called it
SyncTXT, or synchronicity
text messaging.
Well, we'd get these messages
and-- this was an example,
I think, of this
age-old question
about what synchronicity is.
Are meaningful coincidences
just random events on which
we retrofit meaning, because
we want there to be something
more, but it's just random?
Or is there some part of
our minds or some part
of our consciousness
that's conspiring
to sort of bring
two things together
in some meaningful way?
Well, perhaps this
is an example,
at least in this limited
case, of synchronicity
being a consciousness-driven
phenomenon, to some extent.
And so we built
this product called
SyncTXT which allows people
to sign up and actually
have real random number
generators control messages.
>>REGINA: How cool.
>>CURRY: And so
thousands of people
now are experiencing
synchronicities
through a technology
that we created.
So consciousness technology
is, at least, alive
and well as is--
>>REGINA: SyncTXT.
>>CURRY: SyncTXT, yeah.
>>REGINA: And anyone
can-- you can download it?
I mean, you can go to an
app store and find it?
>>CURRY: It's not an
app, it's a website.
>>REGINA: It's a website, OK.
>>CURRY: You just go in and
you put in your mobile phone,
and you can select messages.
>>REGINA: What's
interesting is, you're
talking about that-- so you're
randomly going about your day.
You're just doing your
day, and each one of you
had your random
generator, right?
When you were getting the
spikes, did you at some point
decide to actively go
into observance of,
what was I just feeling
or thinking in the moment?
Question number one.
Question number two, was it
more what you were thinking
or what you were
feeling that was causing
the spikes, the level of
intensity of passion, emotion,
beyond emotion, more
sublime emotion,
like, yes, that's
really interesting?
Which one was it?
>>CURRY: Well, one
of the things that
seems very clear
about-- that comes out
of the research and about the
anecdotal experiences of people
that use things like
SyncTXT is that this
is a subconsciously-driven
phenomenon.
And you get the
strongest effects
when you're experiencing
some kind of meaningfulness.
Now, that could be an emotion.
And usually meaningful things
have attendant emotions, right?
So it's hard to say whether
or not it's what you're doing
or what you're feeling--
what you're thinking
or what you're feeling, but it's
generally a meaningful thing
in which you have both.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I mean, because oftentimes
thought precedes emotion,
and so it precipitates emotion.
Something passes
through an image, passes
through a remembrance,
boom, the emotion's
there which, essentially,
that's subconscious mind.
It's a body of kind of
emotionally-generated
signatures, so to speak,
information, data.
But most of it's
emotionally driven
rather than mind-driven,
intellectually driven,
let's say.
>>CURRY: Right.
For example, there's
a couple of users
who have messages that they can
receive in SyncTXT that say,
don't eat that.
And according to the stories
that they've shared with us,
they tend to get this message
when they're considering
breaking their diet.
>>REGINA: Oh.
Interesting.
Really?
That's not random.
>>CURRY: So that's not an
emotionally meaningful thing,
but it's meaningful
to them in the sense
that some part of themselves
knows what's right for them.
>>REGINA: Well, and
also when you're
thinking of eating something
that you have said to yourself
you're not going to eat, that's
usually an emotional drive.
>>CURRY: Right.
>>REGINA: It's not, gee, I think
I will have that fudge pudding
or whatever.
No.
It's like, oh my
god, I want that.
>>CURRY: Right.
>>REGINA: So you're
dealing with desire,
you're dealing with emotion.
Those are really-- that
has a lot of body to it,
energetically.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
Exactly.
So my consciousness app.
It's called Collective
Consciousness
and it's going to bring in a
number of different, really
interesting consciousness
research and experience
components into it.
We're almost close to raising
the money and getting it built,
but you can look for
it in about 2015.
>>REGINA: What's the mission?
What are you intending
to do with it?
>>CURRY: Yeah.
Well, the mission is to
be the world's largest
consciousness
research experiment,
and to give people a hands-on
experience of everything
we've been talking about today.
And it works using real
random number generators
and can do things like
send messages to the user,
but an individual
can opt to have
their own local random
number generator data sent
to our central servers
where we can look for things
like whether or not collective
consciousness is actually
a real thing by looking at
the covariance of the data
from all of these data
points, all of these people
around the world.
We can do all kinds
of amazing experiments
to look at-- this
is similar, perhaps,
to the global
consciousness project.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I was going to ask
you about that next.
>>CURRY: But has a--
>>REGINA: Does it have a
predictive element to it?
>>CURRY: That's something
that we could test.
>>REGINA: Because then when
you look at that-- now if you
look at sinister agendas, aha.
Here's an app, and you have
all these people willingly--
just like 23andMe, we're all
giving our DNA or our blood
samples and being profiled
genetically and such,
and people are, you know--
So is there a possibility
that after you do this thing
that you're passionate about
and it's so lovely, that it can
be co-opted for other purposes?
>>CURRY: I don't think so.
I don't see any way that
that's really possible at all.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's good to hear.
Because when I hear
how brilliant you are
and what you're coming
up with, I think,
many of the people
I've interviewed
have had the experience of
being radically genius inventors
of cutting-edge stuff.
And then, of course, you
have people showing up
on their doorsteps, you have
the intelligence agency,
the NSA, people like this
showing up, essentially,
and saying, hey, we could
use a little cooperation
on your technology.
You haven't had to
deal with that yet?
>>CURRY: Well, fortunately for
me I'm not a radical genius,
so--
>>REGINA: OK, that's modest.
But, OK.
>>CURRY: They won't
show up on my doorstep.
>>REGINA: They're not
going to bother you.
So you haven't had
to deal with it.
Your group and none
of these people
have had to deal with
any kind of inquiry
by intelligence
communities and such?
>>CURRY: Well, I haven't.
I haven't experienced anything
like that, personally.
But many of the
parapsychology research
labs they come out of the '70s.
I mean, you couldn't
do that stuff.
>>REGINA: Well, Russel
Targ, that was CIA.
>>CURRY: And a lot of them
were actually created and run
by people.
>>REGINA: By intelligence.
That's why I'm wondering.
I mean, you're kind of
the new version of that.
>>CURRY: Right.
Either these groups know a
lot more than what I'm doing.
>>REGINA: That's possible.
>>CURRY: So my technology
is like cart and buggy
compared to what they have.
I don't think so though.
I don't think that
they learned anything
that we didn't learn
in the civilian sector.
I think that they went
on a wild goose chase
thinking that if
they could change
this variable, that
variable, this variable,
and try to get stronger
"effect sizes,"
and try to engineer
consciousness.
But you know what?
Consciousness isn't an
engineering problem.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CURRY: You might
get stronger, like,
effects or better remote
viewers for, like, a few weeks
by tweaking x, and then the
novelty of that wears off
and the decline effect sets in.
And just like it does in all
types of experiments like this,
you're back to
where you started.
So no, I think that--
>>REGINA: Don't you
think you're breaking
the boundary beyond that kind
of ability to be controlled?
>>CURRY: I think that it's
notoriously different to put
a box around consciousness.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
You're right.
OK.
So now let's talk about the
Global Consciousness Network,
and what that's about.
and also I have-- I
was thinking about it
and, any kind of correlations
to the Global Coherence Project
and some of what's being
done with Heart Math,
especially the earth
monitors and so forth?
Kind of taking us
full circle back
to your original technology
work done on as a kid.
>>CURRY: Yeah.
So out of the PEAR lab was
born the Global Consciousness
Project, where Roger Nelson, who
is an experimental psychologist
working in the lab thought, what
if we took these random number
generators and we spread
them around the world
and we fed the data
into a central place?
Are we going to see anything?
An idea which emerged probably
over a couple of beers,
as the best ideas do.
And so he and Dean Radin
set about to do just that.
And to date there's about 70 of
these random number generators
which are feeding in data.
It's been around since 1998.
And basically the
GCP said, OK, well,
we're going to predefined
"large-scale world events"
that polarize
people's attention,
things like sporting events
or natural disasters.
And then we're going
to look at the data
when these events
occur, and we're
going to see if
there's any correlation
between these disparate
random number generators.
And if so what's the
degree of correlation.
And what they found is that
somehow these random number
generators actually do
become more coherent, sort
of less-random and more
coherent to each other
when these large-scale
events that polarize
people's attention occur.
So that's really interesting.
That means that perhaps
either worldwide sort
of focused consciousness
affects the entropy
of these random devices,
makes the world more coherent,
or the people who know about
the GCP are somehow affecting
the random number
generators in a way
that they expect they'll
be affected because
of these events.
In any case, there
seems to be this--
there is this network of these
random number generators that
are very closely
relating-- they're showing
very close relationships
between the lack
of-- or between coherence and
of random data in world events.
But that is a bit limited, in
the sense that you can't really
look more closely at the
behavior of what we might call
a global or a collective
consciousness with only 70
units spread around the world.
So one of the ideas behind the
Consciousness app, my thing,
is that by getting this into the
hands of hundreds of thousands,
or maybe even
millions of people,
we'll have that many
more data points
and we can start to look
in a more granular way
at the notion of a global
or collective consciousness,
and what it is and how it
works and how it behaves.
You asked if it was
predictive or not.
Well, that's a question
that we can perhaps
begin to ascertain with
just more data points.
>>REGINA: Well, is it-- I
don't know if qualitative
is the right word,
but once you start
seeing this coherence
happen, can you also
determine whether the
field has been impacted,
say, negatively or positively?
>>CURRY: I don't think so.
>>REGINA: It's just
you can see coherence.
>>CURRY: Unfortunately, I don't
think that's the way it works.
>>REGINA: It's just a
coherence that's occurring.
>>CURRY: Right.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
People want to get
a hold of the app,
and how are they
going to start--
what's kind of necessary--
if you're going to say,
what's a basic
requirement if you're
a person that wants to become
involved with your app.
>>CURRY: Well, we have a website
and you can check it out.
You can look at the
people who are involved.
Many of the leading
consciousness researchers
are involved with this project,
from Dean Radin and IONS,
to the Global Consciousness
Project and PEAR,
and many leading Silicon
Valley technologists as well
are involved.
So you can read more about it,
you can see what we're up to,
you can see previews
and screenshots.
And most importantly, you
can subscribe for updates.
So if you want to try this
out, just put in your email
and when it's ready we'll
get in touch with you.
>>REGINA: It sounds
absolutely fascinating.
And we have very little time
left, just a minute or so.
Is there anything else
you'd like to get across
that we have not covered in
this conversation regarding
the future of this world
through the potentials
of this kind of technology,
what your dream would be out
of all of this?
>>CURRY: Well,
for my small part,
I love building cool things.
And I'm mostly looking forward
to building something that's
really cool, that has
some staying power.
And if this can be the first
example of a consciousness
technology, in addition
to providing people
with just endless
deep discussions
and hands-on experiences
of these things
that have previously been
relegated to books and talk
shows, then I'll
feel quite satisfied.
But in my own small part I
hope that this will perhaps
expedite this change of
the materialist metaphysic
into something that is more
consistent with reality,
a more integrated notion
of how the world works
that allows for
consciousness to-- it
gives it its rightful
place and just treats it
with a little more respect.
>>REGINA: It's about time.
Thank you so much, Adam.
>>CURRY: Thank you very much.
>>REGINA: To access
more about Adam's work,
you can go to this website
at consciousness-app.com.
Until next time.
Thank you for joining
us here on Gaiam TV.